Originally, the first Fallout title was going to use Steve Jackson Games' GURPS system. The Generic Universal Role Play System is similar to S.P.E.C.I.A.L. with various attributes such as strength and health. After a legal dispute between Steve Jackson Games and Interplay, the rights to the system were revoked and Black Isle had to create their own system. This resulted in A.C.E.L.I.P.S. being created, which would later be rearranged to spell S.P.E.C.I.A.L.
Did you know that you can tip Brahmin over in every main Fallout title excluding Fallout 4? This was originally done by giving them beer in the first Fallout, but it has evolved into a proper action in the later entries.
Like most franchises, Fallout has many influences. Mad Max, A Boy and His Dog, and A Canticle for Leibowitz all had a major impact on the Fallout universe.
Many fans have speculated that he is holding his thumb up to see if he is in the blast radius of a nuclear explosion. While this is a cool myth, it has been debunked numerous times by the founders of Fallout. Brian Fargo, the founder of Interplay and one of the lead producers for the original titles, has gone on record stating it is an ironic expression and nothing more. It seems the Vault Boy is simply a glass-half-full type of person.
Black Isle Studios created the first two major Fallout titles. Bethesda purchased the license and created Fallout 3, but Black Isle had plans for a Fallout 3 of their own.Titled Fallout 3: Van Buren, the game would have taken players to America's southwest, including Arizona, Nevada, Colorado, and Utah. The game's plot would have revolved around the FEV virus from Fallout 1 and 2 with subplots pertaining to the NCR and Brotherhood of Steel. The game was to feature real-time and turn-based combat, cooperative multiplayer, and playable super mutants. Due to Interplay's bankruptcy during development, the project was canned and the rights to Fallout were sold to Bethesda. On the plus side, many of Van Buren's story elements made their way to Fallout: New Vegas, such as the NCR and Brotherhood conflict.
Tim Cain, one of the main creators of Fallout, has mentioned that Fallout's post-apocalyptic setting came from the result of other ideas. Originally, Black Isle was considering a fantasy game similar to Dungeons & Dragons. This then evolved to an ambitious pitch where the player would accidentally kill the human race through time travel and encounter a civilization of dinosaurs in the far future, having to travel through time itself to save his girlfriend. Scrapping that time travel idea, they considered a game around an alien invasion, and that final pitch blossomed into the Fallout franchise we know and love today.
Mr. House attended the Commonwealth Institute of Technology (C.I.T.) aka The Institute
Ghosts have canonical existed in the Fallout universe since Fallout 2. There was a whole quest about returning a pendent to a spirit and burying their remains
VTU in Morgantown had Cannibalism as part of its Curriculum on Post-War Survival:
The vaults are mainly based off of the book of Psalms from the Bible, each vault is loosely based off of a verse from the book corresponding with the vault number. Verse 108 inspired vault 108 for example
The Prindwen isn't the first iteration of a Brotherhood zeplin. They made a few to ferry the outcast Brotherhood to the Mid-West where canonically, their trail is never picked up by the Brotherhood.
It is a known fact that war never changes.
The first time we learn about vault 76 is in fallout 3, and it's subsequent DLC mothership zeta.
Deathclaws were actually designed and made by the pre-war US military as biological weapons to be deployed in China to wreak havoc.
The FEV (Forced Evolutionary Virus) was originally created to force a person's body to evolve so that they would be immune to radiation poisoning/sickness. While this positive was achieved, the virus mutated test subjects into the super mutants that we know if, stripping them off everything from their memories, personalities, genitalia, etc.
Mr. House made highly advanced, almost self-aware and very capable Assaultrons and didn't use them himself for no reason. Also, he had a big impact in creating Liberty Prime. There is a picture of him standing in front of one's assumed prototype.
The NCR, vipers, Khans, and jackals all come from vault 15
The Navy Seals and Green Berets did exist. In a holotape between Maria Chavez and Melody Larkin, the former mentions them when brainstorming names for what would become the Responders' Firebreathers.
On Oct. 23, 2015, Bethesda announced that Fallout 4 had officially "gone gold." Going gold means that the game is officially approved for release and that it can hit shelves soon. The date was chosen for its significance in the Fallout universe. Oct. 23 is the date in 2077 that the Great War officially begins. Though a grim day within the world of Fallout, the date was an exciting moment for fans in the real world.
The sound you hear played upon entering V.A.T.S. is the combat turn sound from Fallout 1. It used to help signal the end of a fight
The names on New Vegas Boulder City memorial are not, as is widely thought, those of developers. They're fictional, but have links to past Fallout games. Roger Westin III is, for example, the grandson of an NCR character in Fallout 2.
The very first piece of Fallout 3 art was created by lead artist Istvan Pely in 2004. It was the power armour image that eventually became the games cover.
The experiments in the vaults are the doing of the Pre-War Enclave. The Enclave did this to test subjects under unique circumstances, such as 1 man and 999 women to Vault 69 and releasing the inhabitants after 10 years in Vault 8. This means the Enclave had control over the vaults after the Great War.
The Enclave most likely has outposts in Chicago, as suggested by a recording found on the companion ED-E. The player can listen and hear a scientist mention how ED-E is being sent to the Enclave outposts located in Chicago.
Old members of the Enclave can be found in the Mojave Wasteland. These soldiers were at Navarro when it was attacked, but managed to get away. Their roles vary, some members were vertibird pilots, officers, or scientists. Escaping being hunted down, they hid around New Vegas.
Grand Zealot Richter is a member of the Children of Atom in the Far Harbor DLC for Fallout 4. What might not have been expected is that Richter was once a soldier in the Enclave. By talking to Richter, the player is able to learn how Richter left the Enclave and joined the Children of Atom. Richter was on a mission to retrieve fusion cores but got trapped in a room of radiation. After days and his squad dying, Zealot Tektus rescued him. After this, Richter devoted his life to Atom.
Super Mutants are the collaborative creation of The US Government and The Master
Rex, the cyber dog from New Vegas, is over 200 years old
There is a theory that a sentiant computer set off the nukes to start the war
Nightstalkers were genetically created by Big Mountain
Deathclaws have chameleon DNA
Cazadors were a product of Big Mountain
Vault 3 has sentient plants
Super Mutant Behemoths are just ancient Super Mutants
If you don't fix Rex's brain in New Vegas, then he dies in the end cutscene
There is a mutant named Howard who grows a sappling in his head who appears in 3 games
Brahmin have 2 sentient heads that think on their own